# 3RAD cleanup and demultiplexing
With the 3RAD protocol, the sequence reads belonging to an individual sample are identified by the p7 index and a pair of inner barcodes. In addition to demultiplexing the reads to sample level, this snakemake pipeline performs a number of filtering steps to remove low-quality reads and potential remnants of the PhiX phage DNA added in sequencing runs to increase performance.

The original of this software was described in [Arantes et al. 2024](https://doi.org/10.1111/1755-0998.13859), and is available [here](https://git.imp.fu-berlin.de/begendiv/radseq-preprocessing-pipeline). Our version is an update in which some bugs due to updates in dependencies are removed, and Python 3 is used consistently throughout all included Python scripts. Beside a bash script for starting the pipeline, it also contains a script turning the output "FlexbarSheetWithCounts.tsv" file into an Excel with differnt cumulative views of the data.

## Prerequisites
Install as described for the original software. Beside the read data demultiplexed by library (i.e. based on the p7 index only), this snakemake pipeline at least needs a config file, specifying the path to the input & output directories, as well as a flexbar sheet (.tsv file) specifying the barcode combinations for each sample within each library (or replicate sub-library). The pipeline is supposed to be run on an HPC using SLURM, yet the tsv to xlsx stats conversion can simply be run on a laptop / desktop computer.
